Mark and sweep garbage collectors actually typically have three phases,
a mark phrase that identifies the objects that is still in use,
a sweep phase that removes unused objects,
and then a compact phase to compact the memory after
all unused objects have been removed.
Here we have a simple diagram of a block of memory.
On the left, we have a root set of references.
So these are references that we can follow from some root mechanism,
maybe maybe the stack, that point at live memory.
If we follow the references from the root set,
any object that references another object also keeps that object alive.
And in the mark phase,
the garbage collector will start at the root set and
walk through each object in turn, following all of its references,
marking each object that's still alive in memory.
Notice that we can have cycles here,
and those cycles don't affect the garbage collector.
So if one object references another, but there's no root reference to them,
that memory can be collected.
In the sweep phase, the garbage is taken away,
and that leaves all the objects still in memory still
being referenced. And then finally, this memory is compacted.
So at this point, we've changed the physical addresses of the memory,
and this is one important point to make about garbage collectors.
In applications such as Java, we tend not have physical references to objects.
We'll have some reference in our application, which the Java
virtual machine internally will be able to use to get an actual
physical location for that piece of memory.
But it's very hard for us to actually get at that physical location.
With the copying garbage collector, things are slightly different. There's
still typically a mark phase and a sweep phase maybe. So here,
for example, we have, a block of memory.
This is allocated on the left,
and this is where all of our current objects are being allocated. The
way the garbage collector will work typically is when this block of
memory called the fromspace becomes full, the garbage collector runs.
Again, It follows the root set, and from the root set marks all the live objects.
But now what happens during the sweep phase is these objects are moved
into the tospace and so compacted at the same time.
And then finally,
the fromspace is cleared. The tospace and the fromspace are
now swapped. The next piece of memory that gets allocated gets
allocated in this new fromspace. And then finally, when that becomes full, the whole process happens again.